[Music]  the future of antidepressants  and the future  of depression  whether you are engaged in formal  research involving uh scientific journal  articles or you're just informally  gathering anecdotes from the people you  happen to know and care about in your  own life what you're gonna find is the  same rationalization the same sort of  strange excuse being offered  again and again and again one this is  something real two this is biologically  real three in some strange way  it's the same as having diabetes how how  can it be i mean you know when you look  back at shakespeare when you look  through you know century by century the  allegories we have used to express  human sorrow human sadness human misery  and in some sense depression how could  it be  that in our  age in our era in our epoch  it's a blood  sugar problem  diabetes that's become the dominant  paradigm for how we think about how we  understand depression oh yes and it's  some cure when we look at the narrative  that has driven our care in the united  states and elsewhere over the past 30  years  it it centers on this chemical imbalance  theory of into the source so the theory  is that say depression is due to lo not  too little serotonin in the brain and  that the drugs fix that serotonin  restore it to a normal level  and there's therefore it's like insulin  for diabetes now that is a metaphor that  is a story that tells of extraordinary  progress think about it you've  identified the very molecule that causes  depression or psychosis or quote adhd  and you can fix it so i was clinically  diagnosed by a psychiatrist in december  2016. i've been having this illness for  four years and according to my research  is that there is no cure for clinical  depression so you can seek treatment and  take medication the medication will  suppress the symptoms  you can go into a remission but then it  comes straight again and then you even  take more medication so the way to treat  it is to keep taking the medication to  treat an analysis like if you have the  kidney disease you have to treat it with  medication and injections or cancer  every day you take your medication oh  and by the way as part of this story of  progress  what happens do we learn about in the  80s early 90s we hear that these drugs  fix chemical imbalances in the brain  so we hear that antidepressant that  depression is due to low serotonin you  take an ssri at absurd energy levels and  therefore it's like a treatment like for  insulin for diabetes so mental illness  is actually  the same as any other illness clinically  depressed means there is actually an  injury in your brain and there is a  chemical imbalance in  so that's the story that we organized  our care around and you can find it was  promoted by the american psychiatric  association and here's the amazing thing  it's not true there's really only one  thing that diabetes has in common  with depression and that is that people  believe  that both  justify taking prescription medication  every day  possibly multiple times per day  for the rest of their lives diabetes has  become the preferred example for  something that is physically and  biologically real  precisely because the question these  people don't want you to ask is  oh you're taking antidepressants  so  are they working  are you cured yet  are you better yet and  when are you going to stop  taking those drugs because if you're  never going to stop then it starts to  sound a whole lot like some kind of  psychological dependency kristen bell  when i was 18 years old my mother said  to me  if you start to feel like you are  twisting things around you and you start  to feel like there was no sunlight  around you and you were paralyzed with  fear  this is what it is and here's how you  can help yourself and i've always had a  really open and honest dialogue about  that especially with my mom which i'm so  grateful for  because you have to be able to cope with  it i mean i present that very cheery  bubbly person but i also do a lot of  work  i do a lot of introspective work and i  check in with myself when i need to  exercise  and  i got on a prescription when i was  really young to help with my anxiety and  depression  and i still take it to this day  and i have no shame in that because my  mom had said if you start to feel this  way talk to your doctor talk to a  psychologist  and see how you want to help yourself  and if you do decide to go on a  prescription to help yourself understand  the world wants to shame you for that  but in the medical community you would  never deny a diabetic his insulin  ever  but for some reason  when someone needs a serotonin inhibitor  they're immediately crazy or something  and i don't know it's a very interesting  double standard  that i often don't have the ability to  talk about but i certainly feel no shame  about  it's interesting that these  conversations tend to begin and end with  statements  about reality about what's truly real  the claim being made again again that uh  depression isn't just a subjective  experience of sorrow or sadness no no no  this is something  real  um  as opposed to  having a discussion about whether or not  the treatment works whether the therapy  is effective whether it gets results  whether or not there's a known cure oh  no to some extent on some level  everyone's aware  that our skepticism is not primarily  directed towards the cure  it's directed towards the mere existence  of the condition  itself and what is our gold standard  for the experience of something being  truly real  it's the blood test you can take when  you're suffering from diabetes isn't it  strange  that this  allegory is used again and again  for a population of millions of people  taking psychiatric drugs for alleged  psychiatric disorders who can never  do this same simple thing themselves  exactly what they're lacking  is a blood test exactly what they're  lacking is a litmus test if you like  exactly what they're lacking is any way  to prove to you to prove the world or to  prove to themselves  that their problem is something real now  i am not of the opinion  that  subjective experiences emotions and  feelings are unreal no no no no no and  sometimes  even within the medical sciences we have  to talk about feelings emotions  subjective experiences  as medically real  symptoms just think about the process of  quitting smoking  overcoming  nicotine addiction  all right there are really severe  symptoms there are measurable symptoms  there are  real symptoms  that you suffer from when you quit  smoking but you know what  most of them are psychological  most of them  can't  can't be demonstrated by taking a drop  of blood from your fingertip oh oh the  reason why you're acting nervous so the  reason why you're depressed or the  reason why you're so frustrated driving  your car sitting in traffic is because  you're going through nicotine withdrawal  no it's not  quite that real  i once read an autobiographical account  from a man  who was taken hostage  he was taken hostage by old-fashioned  armed communist terrorists  in the jungle  and  he was scared for his life he woke up  afraid he fell asleep afraid living in  that terrorist camp every day until he  was rescued  he had been a chain smoker  and he managed to quit smoking without  ever experiencing any of those uh  psychological symptoms he quit smoking  without even noticing that he was going  through the process  of withdrawal  if you have  a condition as simple as the common cold  you can't do that  you can't overlook and you can't  overcome the symptoms of just needing to  cough because you happen to have been  taken hostage if you have diabetes  your blood test when you prick your  finger and draw that drop of blood it's  going to be the same  whether you've been taken hostage by  terrorists or not but if you can be  honest with yourself right now  think about  your own  worst experience of depression sorrow  human misery  think about the darkest saddest time  in your own life and then think about  how much your attitude would have  changed  think about the extent to which you  would have been shaken out of it or the  extent to which you just would not have  noticed  those symptoms those feelings if you  had been the one  taken hostage by terrorists if you were  waking up and falling asleep every day  alert  and afraid for your life  that's what's real  what's real  are the problems you have  and you can't change and you can't  ignore even if you're literally taken  hostage by  terrorists and the analogy is you ask  somebody in the wheelchair you want to  get out of your wheelchair and walk they  are in the wheelchair because they can't  walk so same thing for mental illness  you see you can't work and you can't  function because your brain injury and  chemical imbalance if you look at say  for example the low serotonin theory of  depression depression is due to  absence of normal activity of this  chemical messenger that actually was  sort of falling out of that was a  hypothesis raised in 1965  it was began to be investigated in the  1970s and even in the 1970s researchers  weren't finding it to be so they weren't  finding that people with depression had  low serotonin and as early as 1984 the  nih said  listen there's no sign that there's a  lesion in the serotonergic system that's  a primary cause of depression in 1998  the american psychiatric association's  own textbooks sort of made fun of this  hypothesis  what they said is it came  out of understanding how the drugs act  on the brain they upped serotonergic  levels and so we hypothesized that  people with depression had low serotonin  but we didn't find it to be true so in  1987 we as a people spent in the united  states spend about 800 million dollars  in psychiatric drugs we're now spending  about 40 billion dollars a year on  psychiatric drugs  50-fold increase  you know what percentage of americans of  all ages now take a psychiatric drug on  a daily basis any guess  20  so one in five that tells you how  prevalent these become we of course have  children i think it's the latest data i  saw in children about 13  no excuse me 13 have been diagnosed it's  about 10 now on a drug every day that's  from 6 to 17. as i've mentioned in my  earlier video currently i'm taking 150  mg of effect saw in the morning two  tablets of remember on half a tablet of  olensa pin which is 2.5 mg 2mg of  colonizer pump which is a sleeping pill  i'm maintaining that for medication and  my psychiatrist did try to win me off  the orlando pin but every time i try to  win off a few days time i feel like crap  and he asked me to try to reduce my plan  as a pump to 1 mg and i also have  trouble sleeping and staying asleep  throughout the night if i cut down the  1mg and then the next day again i feel  like crap so yesterday we had sort of  like a chinese new year reunion dinner  my wife and my sister-in-law initiated  this dinner to have it before the  chinese new year is over next to me is  my brother who is 5 years older than me  my son evan next to evan is noel my  eldest son who is 21 now and both of  them are actually in college so all you  know it was a good dinner but i heard  something when i was talking and jason  you have a good wife you have a good two  sons and you have a good house and you  know you will get better you'll be happy  and then that's what the depression  sufferer doesn't want to hear because  it's like i can wield my depression away  it's like saying to someone that was  diabetic oh you have a good family good  children good spouse so you must get  better soon you know so it's the same  thing you see you won't say that to  someone who's having cancer or diabetic  or kidney disease oh no no no now wait  wait  we're here to talk about the future of  antidepressants we're going to talk  about the future of depression  not just  the past  kristen bell  kristen bell thinks she's an activist  kristen bell thinks she's helping people  kristen bell is encouraging each and  every one of you to take your  good-looking teenage daughter tell it to  the psychiatrist and sign her up for  antidepressants sign her up  for anti-anxiety medications and for you  to teach your own children  that they should regard these drugs as  equivalent to insulin and that then they  should feel positive they should feel  proud  to take those drugs  every day for the rest of their lives to  regard it as a perpetual dependency a  treatment that does not lead to any cure  there was a time  when nobody would have thought  of censoring her as recently as 2016  none of us thought of the purpose of  government censorship as being  ensuring the accuracy of medical advice  on the internet  and we've seen a whole lot of crazy  health fads come and go we've seen all  kinds of people peddling cures and  weight loss programs that really could  kill people and some of them  really did  and the governments of the western  democratic world  stood far back and said hey  freedom of speech that's none of our  concern that's none of our business and  you know just in the last few years  things have changed just in the last few  years every single one of us  has experienced a level of censorship  that we never imagined possible as  recently as 2016. if you're a youtuber  you know what it is to have your youtube  videos deleted because you dared to say  something contrary to the government's  message and the government's message was  always changing over the last two years  right you said some that somehow  challenged  the propaganda message of the week as to  what medical science is supposed to be  and how we're all supposed to follow its  dictates in our own personal and private  lives many of you will have known what  it's like to be threatened with having  your twitter account deleted or your  instagram shut down and maybe sometimes  it's just because you made a joke or  because you were talking about a totally  unrelated topic and you happen to have  the wrong keywords in the message i  remember what youtube was like in 2016  and i look at it today and look at all  the strange pauses and gaps where people  don't want to say the wrong word well  that's that's the level of censorship  we've gotten used to in the year 2022  and why  to save lives  the justification  is  that this censorship  will  save lives  if we were  to silence if we were to censor this  beautiful  world famous  actress  do you really think it wouldn't save  lives  and here's the betrayal at the heart of  this  even as science was telling us that it  wasn't true  that american psychiatric association  together with the pharmaceutical  industries were telling us that's what  they had found that's the betrayal and  there's even an extra kicker here  they found for example that people with  a depression didn't have low serotonin  before they went on the drug okay now  you give them a drug that up  certainergic activity what does the  brain do what tries to maintain a  homeostatic equilibrium it's normal  functioning so it actually decreases its  serotonergic activity the physiology of  its serotonin system so here's the irony  of science into the low serotonin the  investigation of low serotonin theory  depression they hypothesize that people  with  depression had low serotonin  they didn't find it to be so before you  went on the drug and then they found  that the drugs induced the very  pathology hypothesized to cause  depression in the first place i don't  have to think about cutting down i just  keep taking and at least every day i can  function and i can shoot videos like  this you know but there are also side  effects of taking the medication okay  firstly you feel hot flushes secondly  you'll feel the need to close your eyes  all the time because of the headaches  you see the headaches attack your eyes  and also you keep yawning non-stop and  you feel the need to eat all the time to  distract the restlessness so i put on  weight and also another side effect is  constipation so the pool is stuck in  wherever in my body so i keep farting  and it's not very nice when you're  around people and i'm having bad  nightmares every night so that's why  taking medication also have its side  effects and the psychiatrist always  wants you to try to win down the  medication my situation is not really  improving and now let's go back to why  would you see a rising disability rates  well one of the things here is instead  of the drugs being drugs that  medications that fix a pathology  what we've really learned is they create  abnormalities in  neurotransmitter function and as soon as  you understand that science it becomes  fairly easy to understand why  particularly over the long term these  drugs are not going to improve  functioning  they're more likely to impair  functioning so to assure you that i'm  not kidding you here is a screenshot of  my oku card i actually applied for oku  and it was successful so the oku as you  can see that it is a mental illness  depression it is a mental illness and  it's not something that is just made up  it is an illness just like if you have  cancer or kidney or pancreas or dementia  yes it is an illness so that is the  proof it's biological meaning there's a  chemical imbalance in the brain and the  brain is the most complex organ in your  whole body conventional narrative is  this that we've made this great progress  this is the narrative told by psychiatry  that we've made great progress in  understanding the biology of mental  disorders we've discovered that they are  illnesses bio you know they have a  biological pathology  and we're getting new and better drugs  that sort of fix that are antidotes to  those disorders we have this narrative  that tells of great scientific problems  we have more people getting treated but  then why  is the burden of mental illness going up  in  society after society as measured by the  number of people on disability due to  psychiatric disorders and in the united  states for example we had 1.25 million  people on disability adults in other  words they were receiving a government  check because they couldn't function in  society  in 1987 that's the year that prozac is  approved for marketing today we have  about five million people in disability  why why do you see this four-fold  increase if we're getting more people  treated and with better and better  medications is that disability  yes so this is people  yeah so this is people  when we talk about the disability  statistics this is people declared  eligible  for disability to receive a social  security payment because of a mental  disorder during this time of second  generation drugs we're seeing this  rising disability  by the way if you follow those kids who  get on disability as children when they  hit age 18 it seems about two-thirds go  on to adult disability right away  so what you see is a new career path  that has opened up in our society  where you get you get diagnosed and said  to be mentally ill  early on and that becomes sort of your  lot in life  so what you see in every country that  has adopted this model of care and  adopted widespread use of psychiatric  medications you see increased mental  problems increased psychiatric problems  among the children and you see the same  in adults so it's  so  normally when you see more people  diagnosed for a problem and more people  treated for the problem the hope is of  course the burden of that problem will  go down in a society it's exactly the  reverse here and you see this in every  country that has adopted this paradigm  of care you see an increasing number of  people who can't work you see an  increase in the assignment their  children are sort of psychiatrically  disturbed you see an increase in  problems among college age kids  so if it were a good thing we would see  the problems of psychiatric distress  lessening in society right among those  who are using the drugs it's exactly the  opposite and the fact that it happens in  societies of different cultures and  different political structures tells you  it's not just country specific related  to their culture it tells you that it's  the paradigm of care itself now here's  the strange irony of the approach taken  by kristen bell  if we are going to treat depression as  seriously as we treat any other  medically real illness if we are going  to look at antidepressants the same way  we look at insulin let me ask you  why isn't there a similar level of  government  censorship applied to disinformation and  misinformation  as spread as propounded as popularized  by people like kristin bell why  shouldn't the government and medical  institutions alike  have a similarly muscular policy against  disinformation  given that it does ruin lives given that  it ultimately has a body count and given  that the disinformation originates  in slogans and marketing campaigns  employed by pharmaceutical giants by the  pharmaceutical industry  back in the 1980s and 1990s but these  are notions  these are dangerous pseudo-scientific  notions that if they weren't debunked  already  in the 1990s  they certainly have been debunked now  i'm disgusted  unsubbed unfollowed goodbye  [Music]